PYROTECHNIC
-----------
Pyrotechnic is a complex firework simulator and editor with which you can construct and display
practically any type of firework you can imagine. It should run on all Acorn machines from an
A3000 upwards.

With the use of the editor you can construct a multitude of fireworks which will closely match
the real thing. There are a multitude of design options giving rise to fireworks which simply
cannot be replicated in real life. It is also very easy to use so making your favourite firework
is now only a matter of time. Alternatively a number of preset designs are available for testing
or modification.

Sound plays an important part in any firework display and all the fireworks come with authentic
sampled sound or closely matching synthesised sounds.

In this description for the mouse buttons:-

Select - left hand button
Menu   - middle button
Adjust - right hand button

Just to show you how to get some action on the screen straight away. Double click on the application
icon with select (after installing it onto hard disk if necessary). When the Pyrotechnic icon installs
itself on the icon bar click with the menu button on the icon and a menu will appear. Right at the
top are two options, 'Display' and 'Firework'. Select either of these and a window will appear.
'Firework' contains individual fireworks and 'Display' displays of individual fireworks in sequence.
Just double click on any which takes your fancy and sit back and watch the show.

FIREWORK DESIGN
---------------
To get the best from the editor use a 256 colour or greater screen mode. Indeed it is only possible to
watch fireworks when in such a mode.

SURFACE
-------
This controls the characteristics and appearance of the surface upon which the firework operates. The
button next to the tick controls if a surface is displayed or not. This is useful if you create
elaborate displays which use a lot of processing power.

The two radio buttons control if a coloured surface is used or a texture mapped one. The texture map
is processor intensive so for ARM2 users it is best just to use the coloured surface.

Additionally the surface has a number of properties under user control. Each is selectable and they
only accept values from 0-100.

(1) Resilience. The amount of bounce a particle may expect when hitting the surface. The higher the
    value the higher the bounce.

(2) Quench. The speed at which heat is taken from a particle, water having a high quench value.

(3) Gravity. The pull exerted by the surface on firework particles. A higher value then the faster
    they fall.

Red, Green and Blue control the colour of the surface and are alterable by one of three methods with
the colour box showing the surface colour selected.

(1) By the direction arrows. Click on these to move the bar up and down.

(2) Enter the value directly by clicking on the area and entering a value at the caret. Values between
    0-255 are acceptable.

(3) Click on the bar where you want it to fill up to.

Click on OK to save the defined surface. In the pane on the right you will find sample surfaces. Just
click on a name using the menu button and a list of self explanatory options will appear. If you click
on OK with select then the window and any other filer windows are automatically closed, click with
adjust to leave on screen. This applies to all windows where you click on OK to save.

For those who want the benefits of a surface without the overhead of plotting it on screen then set
each RGB component to 0. Then it will not be plotted but particles will bounce off it.

ATMOSPHERE
----------
This controls the atmospheric characteristics in which the firework operates. The atmosphere has a
number of properties under user control. Each is selectable as above except they only accept values
from 0-100.

(1) Pressure. The atmospheric pressure. The greater the pressure the slower particles will travel.

(2) Velocity. The wind velocity. Note that this is scaled according to the pressure, no pressure no wind.

(3) Variability. The wind velocity variability. A high value makes the wind come and go in gusts,
    very life-like.

Click on OK to save the defined atmosphere. In the pane on the right you will find sample atmospheres.
Just click on a name using the menu button and a list of self explanatory options will appear.

FUNCTION
--------
The colour of the particle is controlled by the RGB values set when the particle was created. This can
be altered according to a function. This function can be any curve which when applied to the colour
will change it.

Firstly there is the box for the function name. Next to it is a filer icon. This will open up a file
window which contains the functions. Just click on a name using the menu button and a list of self
explanatory options will. The two radio buttons decide how the curve is displayed on the graph below.

In the function box is the formula used to create the curve which can be changed by the user. Any
formula which can be EVAL(uated) from BASIC can be used. Click on the box to calculate and display
the curve. The graph is 512 units wide by 256 units high (+127 to -128). The routine is:-

FOR x=0 TO 511
 <Calculate y coordinate according to x>
NEXT

The formula should use the lower case x variable to display meaningful curves. This should be borne
in mind when writing formulas. Look at the supplied functions to get a feel for it.

As well as this method you can also freehand draw just using the mouse and the select button depressed
while on the graph area.

Below this are three icons, these invert when the pointer is over them, which help in editing the curve.
These clear the curve and flip the curve about the x and y axis. Load in a sample function and click on
the icons to see the effect.

To shift the curve about click on the appropriate number box and enter a value according to the shift
required. The maximum x shift is 100 and the maximum y shift is 100. These will wrap around or be
clipped according to the button to the right of the function box.

To scale the curve enter a value between 1 and 200 then click on the scale box. This is the percentage
by which the values of the curve will be scaled, 100 leaves it exactly the same.The values generated
will also wrap around or be cleared according to the state of the button to the right of the function
box.

Click on OK to save the function. The type of graph plotted, the formula used and the actual curve
are all the information that is saved from this editor.

ENVELOPE
--------
Functions can be modified by an envelope when applied to particles. The envelope editor creates
envelopes for this purpose.

At the top is the box for the envelope name. Next to it is a filer icon. This will open up a file
window which contains the envelopes. Just click on a name using the menu button and a list of self
explanatory options will appear.

The envelope is made up of four components known as ADSR; Attack, Decay, Sustain and Release. The
attack determines how fast the waveform reaches a peak from which it decays to a value where it
is then sustained for a period until finally it is released. The values for ADSR are as follows.

Attack  0-127 These are absolute values.
Decay   0-127
Sustain 0-127
Release 0-127

The graph is made up of four points each with a small box round it. These can be individually
manipulated by clicking on the graph and the nearest box to the pointer will be selected and jump
to it. While keeping the select button pressed you can drag the box to any desired location. Note
that it is not possible to drag a box past the point at which another box is.

CONFIGURATION
-------------
The computer can configured a number of ways from the configure window. At the top is the kind of
processor the machine has. This affects the limit on the number of particles displayed at any one time.

The screen resolution is currently 320 x 256 in 8 bits. Further screen modes may be added at a
future date.

Sound channels. The more sound channels you have the greater the complexity of sound effects you can hear. However, each requires some processor time so use wisely.

Volume. The overall volume level applied to all the sounds. Values from 1-127.

Sound output. Toggle the internal speakers on and off. Useful if you are using an external stereo amplifier.

The configurations come into immediate effect but to save for future use click on the OK box at the bottom.

PARTICLE
--------
Particles leaving a firework have a characteristic behaviour pattern. Here is where particles are defined.
These particles are named and can be used in any firework.

Firstly in the design box we have the name. Click on the filer icon to the right to display all the
current particles. Below is the particle size radio buttons. The size of the ejected particle is
available in one of four sizes. This makes single particle ejections, such as roman candle effects,
more effective.

Next there is the colour box consisting of Red, Green and Blue which control the colour of the particle
as it burns and are alterable by one of three methods.

(1) By the direction arrows. Click on these to move the bar up and down.

(2) Enter the value directly by clicking on the area and entering a value at the caret. Values between
    0-255 are acceptable.

(3) Click on the bar where you want it to fill up to.

The colour box shows the colour of the particle. The values are held internally to a full 24 bit
resolution. Between the colour bar and the number box is an option button. This decides if the
colour component is by a function curve, more on this later.

Just below the colour box is an option button called addition, more on this later, and line. With
line selected a line is drawn on screen from its present to previous position. Without this the
particle is represented by aaccording to the size selected and the distance you are away from it.

Associated with each particle is a function curve. During the lifetime of the particle each colour
component is altered according to this curve only if the option button next to the colour bar is on.
Simply click on the pop up icon and select a function from the menu available.

With each function curve is a period which is the amount of time taken before the function repeats
itself. This value is in tenths of a second up to 100 tenths (10 seconds). The option button repeat
decides this. For with an initial red value of 128, Sine selected, a period of 1 second and the
amplitude of the sine at 128 then the red component will peak at 255 and trough at 0 every second
giving a pulse effect.

Here is where the addition button comes into play. Since the range of each colour component is 0-255
and it is altered by a function (and an optional envelope) then the initial particle colour is
overwritten by the function. By selecting addition the function value is added in to the present
value thereby producing a different effect.

The envelope that is applied to the function is selected and controlled in exactly the same way as
the function. You do not have to have a function or envelope applied to a particle or an envelope
applied to a function. To clear any function or envelope selected just click in the relevant box.

Possible 'problems' you may encounter when using functions and envelopes. For those of you familar
with sample theory (and who isn't) then too low a period (sampling frequency) on the function or
envelope causes a phenomena known as 'aliasing'. The output modifying the RGB values of the particle
exhibits an effect which was not intended (periodic interference). For example consider the sine wave
preset function. If the period is too low then only a part of the curve will be used at each repeat
giving not a smooth change of colour but periodic discontinuous bursts. If the period is the same
the value will be used everytime giving no variation at all.

Additionally a phenomena known as 'creep' can set in. This is where the length of the data is not a
whole multiple of the period. For example, the function and envelope curves are 512 bytes long and
if the period is 100 then each step along the curve is 5.12 bytes. The fractional part is accounted
for but only to a certain number of precision bits. So every pass through the curve will access
slightly different locations either creeping in front of or behind the previously accessed location.
This can give some interesting effects. To eliminate creep make your period a number which divides
into 512 exactly.

The particle has a number of other properties under user control. Each is selectable as above except
the values are as given.

(1) Speed. The speed of a particle has when it leaves the firework, a high value throws it high in
    the air. Note that this is also affected by the atmospheric characteristics. 1-100.

(2) Cone. Imagine an ice cream cone on top of the firework then the particles are ejected at random
    with a path that lies within the cone. A low value gives a tight ejection pattern while a high
    value spreads the particles around. For a static this is just as described, for a rocket the cone
    points downwards and for a catherine wheel the cone is flattend to give the ejection characteristics
    for this type. 0-90.

(3) Ignition. The length of time before a particle ignites on exit. 1-100 tenths of a second. Note
    that a particle will only be plotted on screen when it has ignited.

(4) Duration. The length of time a particle exists before dying off. The duration comes into effect
    from ejection. 1-100 tenths of a second.

When a particle hits the surface a number of things can happen:

(1) Surface present. If the particle is off the displayed surface then it is removed else it uses
    the surface characteristics for the firework. The envelope, function and spawn are disabled.

(2) Surface absent. The particle is removed when it hits where the surface would have been.

The particle will be removed when it has 'cooled down' completely, it is black in colour or it has
slowed down sufficiently.

Finally sound. There are a number of separate sound effects which can be attached to a particle and
they are linked to the following events.

(1) Ignition. The sound used at this time point. Simply click on the popup icon and select from those
    available.

(2) Death. On the death of the particle this sound is used, death here means when the duration of the
    particle is up and not when removed because cold, slow etc.

(3) Surface. The sound used on hitting the surface.

To hear any sound click on the pop up menu icon and select the sound you wish to hear played. Select
using the adjust mouse button instead of select and the menu will stay on screen enabling you to repeat
the sound easily. To clear any particular sound simply click in the relevant box.

Click on the OK button to save the particle.

Each particle can spawn a number of other particles (see below). When a particle is created for the
first time these entries are cleared.

SPAWN
-----
Particles would be uninteresting if they only left the firework, changed colour and died so they have
the property of being able to split into other particles over which you have complete control. From
each 'mother' particle you can have up to 8 'daughter' particles (and these can have daughters also
ad-infinitum). It is not possible for a mother to give birth to incarnations of itself as this would
clog up the display on certain time settings. (Sadists who like to see code crawl can get around this.)
Simply click on the popup menu and select which you want. A particle can be either a 'mother' or
'daughter' depending on where it is used. To keep things simple we recommend that you create particles
and use them either as mothers or daughters. Next click on the popup menu next to a daughter name box
and select which you want.

Now you want to be able to control how the daughter leaves the mother to create different effects.
This is controlled by two values.

(1) Deviation angle. A value from 0-180 (degrees) 0 points vertically upwards while 180 points
    vertically downwards.

(2) Rotation angle. A value from 0-360 (degrees). The amount of rotation applied.

To get, say, two daughters identical to the mother being born to the mother at the same time, one up
and one down, then create two particles the same (use different names). For the deviation angle give
one 0 and the other 180, do not give any rotation. Using this 'chrysanthemum' type effects are easily
achieved. Rotations are applied ANTICLOCKWISE as per 3D graphics convention and are applied in the
direction a mother particle is travelling at that moment.

Now the time a daughter particle is born is entered which is the total time from the mother being born.
For instance at time 0 the mother is born, if you enter 50 (tenths of a second) in this box then the
daughter will be born 5 seconds into the life of the mother and daughters from it (if there are any)
will be born according to their birth time. If the particle should hit the ground before a daughter
is born then no subsequent daughters will born, the particle is sterile. This value is in tenths of
a second up to 100 (10 seconds). The daughters can be one off in that only one daughter is born after
a period of time. They can also be continually born, a repeat button at the right of the time selects
this.

Lastly, the daughters leaving speed which is set by option buttons. It can either take the speed of
the mother particle at the time of birth, which is the default, or the exit speed defined in the
particle editor. The cone is unused.

Using this ability to spawn new particles means it is possible for a great many particles to be active
at anyone time. This can slow down the simulation despite the heavily optimised plotting routines and
also make the display cluttered so be careful in its use. Pyrotechnic will attempt to keep a constant
frame rate so if things are slowing down too much then new particles will not be born. You probably
will not notice this.

CHARGE
------
This is where it finally all comes together. Firstly the name of the firework. Click on the filer window
and load a pre-defined firework. The type of firework is selectable by radio buttons and they are: static
(sits still on the ground), catherine wheel (a rotating firework on a post) and a rocket. The same
defined firework can be displayed in any of these three modes but it is best to design your firework
with a type in mind.

Down the left are 8 boxes which control which particles the firework is going to be packed with. Simply
click on the popup menu box and choose one from the list. The colour to the right is a colour key to
the charge box to it. Simply click on any of the squares to put particles in that particular part of
the firework. The colour box at the bottom indicates the currently selected particle. To remove all
particles of a particular colour on the name on the left. To remove just a particular square from the
charge box click with adjust on the small square itself.

Below this is how many particles are present in each box. Select values in the range 1-25. To the
right of the firework is the rate of burn for that particular section of the firework. It simply
controls how many particles ejected at any particular time from that section. Alter this bar by
clicking on the direction arrows at the far right or on the bar itself.

Finally at the bottom the required atmosphere and surface for this firework. These must be specified
by clicking on the popup menu and selecting an option. The preset surface 'Black' will give an
invisible surface (surface not present) and the preset 'Vacuum' will give no atmosphere with normal
gravity.

If any rows are left free of particles then the firework 'burns' through this at the rate selected
but no particles are generated. This can give you suitable pauses between sections of the firework.
If it is completely empty below then the firework will finish.

Save the firework by clicking on the OK box at the bottom.

STAND
-----
This lets you build up displays of fireworks which are lit one after the other. Firstly enter the name
of the stand which you want your display to have. Down the left are 8 boxes which can be filled by
using the pop up menus to select the fireworks from.

Click on OK to save the stand. In the pane on the right you will find sample stands. Just click on a
name using the menu button and a list of self explanatory options will appear.

The repeat option, at the side of the name icon, if selected then the display will loop until Escape
is pressed. This is useful for demonstrations and just to enjoy the fireworks (it also impresses friends).

VIEWING
-------
To view your firework you can use either of these two methods.

(1) Select firework from the application menu. The firework window appears. Click on a firework with
    select.

(2) Select display from the application menu. The display window appears. Click on a display with
    select.

If any of the component parts of a firework or display are missing from Pyrotechnic then a suitable
error message will appear informing you of this and you will have to correct it. For errors involving
spawn of particles you may get an error message saying the particle is 'bomb.fizz'. This means that
particle 'bomb' has a daughter called 'fizz' which is missing. The '.' separates particle names. If
the particle name ends in '...' then this means that the full length of the particle string could not
be shown. In practise this is extremely unlikely to happen.

Pyrotechnic does extensive searches to make sure fireworks, particles, envelopes and functions are
present as required so this may take a little time especially when run from a floppy disk.

At anytime if you wish to abort a firework or a display then press ESCAPE and you will return to the
desktop.

When viewing a firework you can use the following controls...

MOUSE
-----
Select - Autolock. This makes sure that you are always looking at the centre of the firework which is
         most useful when you are following a rocket. A small red square will appear in the bottom
         right hand corner when activated.

Menu   - Pause/Release. A small green square will appear in the bottom right hand corner when activated.
         This is different from what you might expect: the firework is halted but you can still move/fly
         around etc.

Adjust - Autopilot. While the firework is active the view point will spiral around and up in the air.
         If autolock is on then this will keep the firework central. When it has reached a certain height
         it will start to move down. A small blue square will appear in the bottom right hand corner when
         activated.

Move left    - move around the firework in a clockwise direction     +
Move right   - move around the firework in a anticlockwise direction +
Move away    - tilt downwards *
Move towards - tilt upwards   *

KEYBOARD
--------
Cursor left  - decrease the viewing height  +
Cursor right - increase the viewing height  +
Cursor up    - advance towards the firework +
Cursor down  - retreat from the firework    +

+ disabled on autopilot
* disabled on autolock